# scalajs-fun

Trying out ScalaJS.

I'll try to port CycleJS to ScalaJS in order to learn both of it.

The egghead course looks like a good way to start ðŸ¤”
https://egghead.io/courses/cycle-js-fundamentals

## Used libraries

If you want to use a library with Scala.js, you need to use one that is exported to
`<group>.<identifier>_sjs<version>` (just like Scala `_2.10` or `_2.11`). RxScala is currently not supporting this,
according to this issue: https://github.com/ReactiveX/RxScala/issues/161

Therefore, I went with [scala.rx](https://github.com/lihaoyi/scala.rx). It is not really the same as RxScala, but you
can have reactive variables with it. It has a different API, but may be working in a similar way.

## Video 01 - The Cycle.js principle: separating logic from effects

As you cannot map with scala.rx but have `Var` and `Rx{}`, the code looks a bit different.

## Video 02 - Main function and effects function

To separate logic and effects, the code is split into two functions. As this was done, the next step is to use the sink
(the `Rx[String]` in our case) and hand it over to multiple effects: Writing into DOM and writing into console.

The main function is called `logic()` as `main()` is needed by `js.App` as main entry point.

## Video 03 - Customizing effects from the main function

In this case, the main function (called `logic` in our case) is split into separate sinks. This is done through a map in
the video. It's not possible to return `Obs` directly and use it as the value of the observed `Rx` is not passed into
the callback.

Weird behavior: When using `i() = i() * 2` instead of `i() = i() + 2`, the `consoleLogEffect` does not fire anymore.
After fiddling around with this a bit more, I realized that `i` was set to `Var(0)` initially. Every update `* 2` made
it be `0` again, so it does not update internally and therefore does not fire again. To prevent that, one should use the
`.propagate()` method on the `Rx` / `Obs` that listens on `i`.

When using [scala.rx](https://github.com/lihaoyi/scala.rx) version `0.3.0+`, it added Ownership context. This is used to
prevent creating leaky `Rx` when nesting them. The documentation doesn't really say how to create a safe context, so in
the current code, the line `implicit private val ctx = Ctx.Owner.safe()` is added to the App object as it doesn't seem
to be possible to create this in the `main()` method itself.

## Video 04 - Introducing run() and driver functions

This is more or less a matter of renaming things: `effects` are called `drivers` now and there is a map to show the
respective drivers that are at work right now. If one is not used / needed, one can comment it out without having to
touch multiple lines now.

## Video 05 - Read effects from the DOM: click events

In this video, the drivers start returning sources. The proxy logic is different to JavaScript as we are usually not
passing around mutable state. It needs to be done in a more scala-like way.

The drivers have to use input and output parameters in order to use the same Variable as the `proxySource`. Using the
`.getOrElseUpdate()` method on the `proxySource` `Map`, we can initialize the sources in the `main` method. This keeps
the whole logic and variable initialization inside the main method.

## Video 06 - Generalizing run() function for more types of sources

Using the `trigger` method, we can actually get rid of the output parameter in the drivers method. This way, we have two
separate variables, but this seems to be the way that Cycle does it itself.

To truly generalize the `run` method now, it's been pulled out into the `Scycle` object. Using type aliases makes it a
bit easier to understand which types are used for what. It also shows that the logic method does a bit more right now
than just taking the drivers output and giving some output to feed into the respective driver.

### Note about implementation of the timer

A small thing which is different to the implementation of the JavaScript is that the interval timer does not get reset
every time the document is clicked. If we were starting a new interval timer on each click, we would need to introduce a
variable that can be used to clear the old timer and remembers the new one. So it's possible to do but in order to keep
the implementation of the core Cycle principle in focus, we will continue with the single timer.

## Video 07 - Making our toy DOM Driver more flexible

The latest refactorings are done to abstract the driver and let it do a lot more for us. It receives a specific input 
(in case of the `DomDriver` it wants a `dom.Element`) and returns functions that can be used to receive events in the 
main function. Called `selectEvents`, it takes the currently available DOM elements and adds event listeners on them. In
the current implementation, it cannot add listeners to the added elements yet, as the selectEvents call is done before 
the elements are added to the DOM.

## Video 08 - Fine-grained control over the DOM Source

The new implementation of the DomDriver takes all events that occur on the document and then filters out the ones that
we created listeners for. This ensures to catch events of newly created DOM elements as well.

## Video 09 - Hyperscript as our alternative to template languages

In this video, we see a small improvement on creating and handling the DOM elements. It uses Hyperscript, which is 
basically functions wrapping around the creation of DOM elements. Something similar is implemented with the 
`Hyperscript` trait and the `HyperScriptElement` classes. The `Text` case is somewhat special, as we need to wrap a text
node into a span to let it count as an element. With an implicit conversion of `String` to `Text` (`stringToTextNode`)
we can get rid of extra calls to `Text()`.

## Video 10 - From toy DOM Driver to real DOM Driver

When creating the DOM Driver, we now pass a selector to it, to select the container element. The container element is 
still the one we were using before (`#app`), so the result does not change. The `makeXXXDriver` functions now return a
function expecting a `LogicOutput` and return a `Driver`. This way, we do not need to pass an explicit `input` and can
just use / cast from the `LogicOutput` (that is what the `input` variable has been before anyways).

The drivers were moved into a separate package. During this refactoring, the `ConsoleDriver` received the `input` 
parameter just like the `DomDriver`.

> Latest refactor: Move `Hyperscript` elements into `dom` package. Remove `ConsoleDriver` to focus on single `dom` 
driver and start with next lesson.

## Video 11 - Hello World in Cycle.js

First, we create a few more helpers for the `Hyperscript`. A `label`, `input` and `hr` element helps to build the GUI.
Doing a complete replacement of `container.innerHTML` with the `outerHTML` of `input()`, the GUI updates with a quirk: 
The input field looses focus whenever the view updates.

We could use a virtual dom implementation to just replace the HTML that changes. But if we'd do so, the focus problem 
will probably stay.
